---
layout: disease
title: Rotavirus
prevalence: "Rotavirus is estimated to cause more than 125 million cases of infantile diarrhea annually. It is the leading cause of childhood dehydrating gastroenteritis in the world, leading to the hospitalization of more than 2 million children annually."
geography: ""
mortality: "Approximately half a million deaths in children younger than 5 years are seen worldwide due to rotavirus. Virtually all these deaths occur as a result of excessive fluid loss."
morbidity: "Rotavirus mainly infects cells in the small intestines that have a role in intestinal absorption of fluid and electrolytes. Rotavirus infection leads the body to lose excessive fluids from the intestines. "
affected: "The highest rates of illness occur among infants and young children, and most children are infected by age 5. Adults can also be infected, though disease tends to be milder. Young children aged 4-24 months, particularly those in group daycare settings, are at increased risk for acquiring rotavirus. Low birth weight and prematurity as well as the paucity of breastfeeding have been associated with hospitalization from rotavirus. Almost every child 5 years and younger at some point will be infected with rotavirus in both developed countries and developing countries. In countries with relatively low incomes, the median age at which an infant develops rotavirus infectious symptoms is between 6 to 9 months with 80% of the infections occurring at < 1 year of age."
pathogen:	"Viruses belonging to the family of Reoviridae. Rotavirus has a characteristic wheel-like appearance when viewed by an electron microscope. The name rotavirus is derived from the Latin word rota, meaning “wheel.”"
vector:	"Humans only."
transmission:	"The primary mode of transmission is the fecal-oral route, usually through direct contact between people. Because the virus is stable in the environment, transmission also can occur through ingestion of contaminated water or food and contact with contaminated surfaces or objects."
symptoms:	"The physical examination findings for rotavirus infection are often unremarkable except for signs of dehydration."
prognosis: "The prognosis for rotavirus infection is excellent as long as adequate hydration is maintained. Most children recover within a week of symptom onset. Rotavirus enteritis has virtually no important long-term sequelae."
immunity:	 "In addition, there has been documentation of herd immunity after rotavirus vaccinations."
references: "https://www.cdc.gov/rotavirus/clinical.html"
---
Rotavirus is both highly contagious and resilient in the environment, meaning that it can survive for months on a surface at room temperature (Shim, Feng, Martcheva, & Castillo-Chavez, 2006). Rotavirus has an extremely low infectious dose: the likelihood of acquiring an infection after being exposed to a single rotavirus particle is 31% (Gall, Mariñas, Lu, & Shisler, 2015). Furthermore, even when patients are asymptomatic they shed the virus in their feces in extremely large numbers (Gall et al., 2015). The disease is spread through the fecal-oral route and is often passed on from person-person or object-person with a contaminated surface.

Children are almost guaranteed to be infected with rotavirus, no matter what country they live in. According to Shim et al., 95% of all children in the world have experienced rotavirus infection (2006). The highest rates of illness occur between age 6 months and 2 years old (Shim et al., 2006). The WHO recommends that all children be vaccinated against rotavirus, to decrease both the incidence and severity of the infection in young children. There are two main rotavirus vaccines: RotaTeq by Merck & Co and Rotarix by GSK (Tate, Burton, Boschi-Pinto, & Parashar, 2016). In a developed country, a vaccinated infant is about 85-98% protected against severe rotavirus and 74-87% protected against rotavirus illness of any severity (CDC, 2019a).

In healthy individuals, rotavirus infection will clear on its own after only a few days. However, the immune systems of children in low-income countries are already weak because of the higher prevalence of malnutrition, making them especially vulnerable (Nakawesi, Wobudeya, Ndeezi, Mworozi, & Tumwine, 2010). Acute infection that leads to dehydration is most worrisome for infants, small children, the elderly, and people with other illnesses. For those who get more severe forms of the infection, the treatment aims to alleviate dehydration while the infection runs its course (CDC, 2019). Children in low-income countries often die from rotavirus-induced dehydration because they lack access to oral rehydration supplies (Nakawesi et al., 2010).  

Once an individual is infected with rotavirus, there is about a 48-hour incubation period (i.e. it takes approximately 2 days for symptoms to appear) (Shim et al., 2006). A child can still spread rotavirus during the incubation period, before symptoms appear. According to the United States Center for Disease Control, symptoms of rotavirus disease are: diarrhea and vomiting for 3-8 days, often accompanied by fever, abdominal pain and fever (CDC, 2019a).
Even though rotavirus vaccination is promoted by the WHO, there are multiple considerations that affect policymakers’ decision to introduce a national immunization campaign (Babji & Kang, 2012). These factors include: financial and logistic, a perceived lack of need, and trials in developing countries that showed the vaccine was less effective in high mortality countries (Babji & Kang, 2012). A number of children start immunization but do not complete the immunization schedule and, therefore, do not get the full benefits of immunization (Ministry of Health, 2018). Still, even if the vaccine isn’t perfect in developing countries, it is likely to be extremely beneficial at reducing diarrheal deaths.

In June 2018, the Government of Uganda announced that rotavirus vaccine would soon be incorporated into the Routine Immunization Schedule (Ministry of Health, 2018). The introduction has been largely subsidized by international financers, such as GAVI, WHO, UNICEF, with the Government of Uganda contributing about 9% of the cost (Ministry of Health, 2018). Under the agreement, the government will be responsible for a larger share of the vaccine costs each year. It is unclear how well the government of Uganda will cope with the increases financial and responsibilities, as well as ensuring that citizens do come back for follow-up immunizations.
