---
layout: review
date: 2018-08-08
img: nudge.jpg
title: "Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness"
author: Richard H. Thaler
link: "https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3450744-nudge"
year: 2009
fig-caption: Nobel Prize Winner, New York Times bestseller, Best Book of the Year by The Economist and the Financial Times
tags: [book, economics, policy, strategy]
---


> The more choices there are, and the more complex the situation, the more important it is to have enlightened choice architecture. To produce a user-friendly design, the architect needs to understand how to help Humans. Software and building engineers live by a time-honored slogan: keep it simple. And if a building has to be complicated to be functional, then it is best to offer plenty of signs to help people navigate. Choice architects need to incorporate these lessons.
<br>
--- Richard H. Thaler

<br>

Not only are the theories behind *Nudge* well-researched, but I found the examples used throughout the book to be profoundly relatable. For instance, in explaining [Status Quo Bias](https://www.behavioraleconomics.com/resources/mini-encyclopedia-of-be/status-quo-bias/), Thaler discusses the way that many people tend to stick with an initial retirement savings or pension plan without ever going back to re-allocate assets. I've certainly been guilty of doing this before- using the option suggested to me by my brokerage account manger or health insurance provider - because I'm too busy/tired/(insert excuse) to do the research and find the exact optimal plan for myself.

Thaler explains that this tendency to stick with the default option is extremely common across a wide range of everyday problems. Rather than scold lazy people (like me) for not doing the full research (e.g. reviewing my insurance options every year to see if my current plan is still the most optimal one for me), he suggests that policymakers should leverage knowledge of the Status Quo Bias to set better default options for consumers.

In Chapter 10, Thaler uses the particularly striking example of Medicare Part D, which assigned people who did not select a particular policy to a **random policy option**, rather than considering their individual needs (e.g. elderly individuals tend to have more prescription needs). Especially in this age of <a href="/big-data/">datafication</a> it is easy to envision a world where default options are intelligently suggested based on the specific characteristics of the individual involved. Thaler lays out convincing argumentation for why random assignment is a terrible idea, and why (especially for complex insurance/health policies) we should not only focus on "nudging" consumers towards better default choices, but by assisting them in being more informed and empowered consumers by making these complex systems more user-friendly and transparent.
