---
layout: post
title: Rethinking the Bradley Classification system
date: 2019-06-21
description: Call for more useful multi-disease terminology to replace the Bradley Classification system.
img:  Gross_Fdiagram.jpg
fig-caption: Simplified version of the F-diagram commonly used to describe disease transmission.
tags: [water, sanitation, hygiene, WASH, public health, infectious disease]
---
If you work on water or sanitation projects, chances are that you are familiar with the term "waterborne diseases". 

## Types of disease
Groups of infectious diseases are often clustered according to scientific taxonomy or clinical symptoms, which is useful for purposes of diagnosis and treatment but is less useful when discussing environmental drivers behind disease transmission (Eisenberg, Desai, et al., 2007).

Many of the most pressing infectious pathogens related to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) systems do not share the same symptoms or scientific taxonomy, making it difficult to classify them together under a common moniker. In 1972, White et al. tried to address this problem by creating the **Bradley Classification** system of the following groups of disease: “water-borne,” “water-washed,” “water-based” and “water-related” (Bartram & Hunter, 2015). Along with the term “diarrheal disease,” the Bradley Classification system remains the predominant way of discussing multiple diseases in WASH programming.

Even for WASH experts, however, the delineation between the different Bradley Classifications is head-scratching. For instance, the vast majority of water-borne diseases can also be considered water-washed. Additionally, some pathogens classified as water-borne such as rotavirus are unlikely to be controlled only by improving water quality, requiring other interventions as well (Kraay et al., 2018).

While the Bradley Classification system remains the most widely-used set of terminology, it is questionable how useful it is for supporting policy evaluations. The complexity behind environmental change means that relevant disease categorization schemes from a prevention or policy standpoint have remained elusive (Eisenberg, Desai, et al., 2007).

It is important to disaggregate by pathogen when analyzing WASH strategies (or at least, to aggregate carefully) to avoid misleading conclusions. The granularity of disease information can improve the recommendations of quantitative models.

One of the key barriers to expanding multi-disease evaluations rests with the **limitations of current terminology**. This is especially so when working with policymakers from non-medical backgrounds or when speaking to the wider public, who may be confused by long lists of Latin names.  In that regard, it is easy to see why the moniker “waterborne disease” has been so successful – it not only encompasses a large number of pathogens but it quickly and effectively emphasizes a shared aspect among them.

Existing classification systems do not address policy-relevant concerns. For instance, policymakers do not need to consider control strategies against “bacteria” separately from strategies against “protozoa,” when their primary concern is how best to improve population welfare. Nor is the distinction between “water-based” and “water-related” relevant to understanding which intervention strategies are most worthwhile.

Even though many infectious diseases of poverty are related to water, the Bradley Classification system is ineffective for supporting policy-relevant decisions. It is strongly recommended that a new classification system is created to improve both the salience and analysis of multi-disease evaluations. Specifically, the new system should classify pathogens by their primary control strategy. This would help policymakers and practitioners choose control strategies that work across a large number of diseases.
