---
layout: post
title: Many-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms in Policy Analysis
date: 2019-08-23
description: Many-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms in Policy Analysis
img: pareto.png # Add image post (optional)
fig-caption: # Add figcaption (optional)
tags: [modeling, ema workbench, optimization, programming, MOEA]
---
## Pareto Optimality
There are many different ways to computationally search for promising candidate policies in light of conflicting objectives. The notion of **Pareto optimality** means finding a set of multiple best solutions for the problem, where each solution is a compromise between different objectives. A clear estimate of the Pareto front can be highly useful in helping policymakers to select robust plans as well as to learn about the underlying dynamics of the system.

## Why use Many-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms for robust policy search?
Many-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms (MOEAs) are particularly useful in their ability to perform global optimization and discover high-performing policy options (Kasprzyk et al., 2013). Mimicking natural processes of evolution, MOEAs iteratively evaluate possible strategies across the many objectives until the best candidates are found. Using an MOEA is chosen over classical optimization methods for the following reasons:
* Rather than handling a single solution, the population-based approach of MOEAs can be used to find a large number of solutions in a single run.
* MOEAs are ideally suited to working in parallel systems, which can dramatically reduce computational expenses.
* Because the algorithm’s evolutionary processes are separate from the issue it is applied to, MOEAs are easily applied to different problems.
The application of MOEAs to many-objective policy problems is useful for keeping performance measure disaggregated while enabling the evaluation of trade-offs between various alternatives (Kasprzyk et al., 2013). In short, MOEAs provide an efficient way to determine the Pareto front and highlight potentially robust policy options.

## Which MOEA to use?
One popular algorithm for policy search is the **Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGAII)**, which was introduced by Deb in 2002. In many applications, NSGAII has been found to converge better than alternative algorithms and is capable of preserving a good level of diversity, thus avoiding getting stuck in a local minimum. The algorithm excels at obtaining a variety of solutions. NSGA-II uses an elitist strategy that allows it to find a better spread in the non-dominated front than other algorithms and get better solutions with less computational complexity.

NSGAII is based on a non-dominated sort of the population in each iteration. The algorithm begins by generating a random population of policy levers, then the values of the objective functions are evaluated and ranked. The ranking represents how close that policy option is to the current Pareto front (rank of 1=on the front). These candidates are sorted based on their ranking (and then by *crowding distance*, which represents how far that solution is to other solutions in the same rank). Traditional NSGAII was extended in 2005 by Kollat & Reed into **epsilon-NSGAII**, which includes adaptive population-sizing and epsilon-dominance archiving for increased performance.

Many other MOEAs exist (such as BORG by Hadka and Reed) that present powerful search alternatives for policy analysis. Tools such as the [exploratory modeling workbench](https://github.com/quaquel/EMAworkbench) by Jan Kwakkel can incorporate a variety of search algorithms. Notably, epsilon-NSGAII is the default search algorithm used by ema workbench, which provides a relatively thorough and efficient use for beginner to intermediate applications.  
